Chessboard and Queens 

1.  What the problem is asking

-   We are given an 8x8 chessboard.
-   Some cells are blocked (*), some are free (.).
-   We must place 8 queens.
-   No two queens can attack each other.
-   Queens attack in same row, same column, and both diagonals.
-   We must count how many valid ways exist.

2.  Key observation

-   There are 8 rows and we must place 8 queens.
-   So we must place exactly one queen in each row.
-   That simplifies the problem a lot.
-   Now we only decide: in each row, which column do we choose?

3.  Idea of the solution

-   We solve it using DFS (depth-first search) with backtracking.
-   We go row by row.
-   At each row, we try all safe columns.
-   If a column is safe, we place a queen and move to the next row.
-   If we reach row 8, it means we placed all 8 queens safely. That is
    one valid solution.

4.  How we track used positions

Instead of using arrays, we use bitmasks (integers).

We maintain three integers:

-   cols -> which columns are already used
-   d1 -> main diagonals that are attacked
-   d2 -> anti-diagonals that are attacked

Each bit represents one column.

If a bit is 1, that position is blocked. If a bit is 0, that position is
free.

5.  Precomputing free cells

-   For each row, we build a mask called rowMask.
-   If a cell is free (.), we set that column’s bit to 1.
-   If a cell is blocked (*), we leave that bit as 0.
-   This avoids checking the board repeatedly during DFS.

6.  Finding valid positions in a row

At a given row, we compute:

available = rowMask[row] & ~(cols | d1 | d2)

This means: - It must be a free cell. - It must not be in a used
column. - It must not be attacked by diagonals.

The result is a bitmask of all safe columns in that row.

7.  Choosing positions efficiently
-   Instead of checking all 8 columns one by one,
-   We extract the lowest set bit using:
    pos = available & -available
-   This gives us one valid column instantly.
-   Then we remove that bit from available and continue.
-   This makes the solution faster and cleaner.

8.  Updating diagonals
When we place a queen:
-   We mark the column as used: cols | pos
-   Main diagonal shifts left: (d1 | pos) << 1
-   Anti-diagonal shifts right: (d2 | pos) >> 1
Shifting works because diagonals move one column left or right when we
go to the next row.

9.  Base case
-   If row == 8,
-   It means we successfully placed all 8 queens.
-   We increase the answer count.

10. Time complexity
-   In worst case, it is similar to 8! (about 40,320).
-   However, pruning makes it much faster in practice.
-   Since N = 8 is fixed, it runs in constant time for this problem.

General case for N queens: - Time complexity is approximately O(N!).

11. Space complexity

-   Recursion depth is at most 8.
-   We only store a few integers (bitmasks).
-   So space complexity is O(N) due to recursion stack.
-   For N = 8, space usage is very small.

